2.1 COST OF CAPITAL
In this unit, we focus on the concept of the cost of capital as a discount rate and the
procedure of its measurement.
The opportunity cost of capital (or simply, the cost of capital) for a project is the
discount rate for discounting its cash flows. The project's cost of capital is the minimumrequired rate of return on funds committed to the project, which depends on the
riskiness of its cash flows. Since the investment projects undertaken by a firm may differ
in risk, each one of them will have its own unique cost of capital. It should be clear at
the outset that the cost of capital for a project is defined by its risk, rather than the
characteristics of the firm undertaking the project.
The firm represents the aggregate of investment projects undertaken by it.
Therefore, the firm's cost of capital will be the overall, or average, required rate of return
on the aggregate of investment projects. Thus the firm's cost of capital is not the same
thing as the project's cost of capital. Can we use the firm's cost of capital for discounting
the cash flows of an investment projects. The firm's cost of capital can be used for
discounting the cash flows of those investment projects, which have risk equivalent to
the average risk of the firm. As a first step, however, the firm's cost of capital can be
used as a standard for establishing the required rates of return of the individual
investment projects. In the absence of a reliable formal procedure of calculating the cost
of capital for projects, the firm's cost of capital can be adjusted upward or downward to
account for risk differentials of investment projects. That is, an investment project's
required rate of return may be equal to the firm's cost of capital plus or minus a risk
adjustment factor depending on whether the project's risk is higher or lower than the
firm's risk. There does exit a methodology to calculate its cost of capital for projects. The
objective method of calculating the risk-adjusted cost of capital for projects is to use the
capital asset pricing model (CAPM), as we show later in this unit.
2.1.1 Meaning and Significance of Cost of Capital
We should recognize that the cost of capital is one of the most difficult and disputed
topics in the finance theory. Financial experts express conflicting opinions as to the
correct way in which the cost of capital can be measured. Irrespective of the
measurement problems, it is a concept of vital importance in the financial decision
making. It is useful as a standard for:  evaluating investment decisions,  designing a firm's debt policy, and
 appraising the financial performance of top management
Investment evaluation
The primary purpose of measuring the cost of capital is its use as a financial
standard for evaluating the investment projects. In the NPV method, an investment
project is accepted if it has a positive NPV. The project's NPV is calculated by
discounting its cash flows by the cost of capital. In this sense, the cost of capital is the
discount rate used for evaluating the desirability of an investment project. In the IRR
method, the investment project is accepted if it has an internal rate of return greater
than the cost of capital. In this context, the cost of capital is the minimum required rate
of return on an investment project. It is also known as the cutoff rate, or the hurdle rate.
An investment project that provides a positive NPV when its cash flows are
discounted by the cost of capital makes a net contribution to the wealth of shareholders.
If the project has zero NPV, it means that its cash flows, have yielded a return just equal
to the cost of capital, and the acceptance or rejection of the project will not affect the
wealth of shareholders. The cost of capital is the minimum required rate of return on the
investment project that keeps the present wealth of shareholders unchanged. It may be,
thus, noted that the cost of capital represents a financial standard for allocating the
firm's funds, supplied by owners and creditors, to the various investment projects in the
most efficient manner.
Designing debt policy
The debt policy of a firm is significantly influenced by the cost consideration. As
we shall learn later on, debt helps to save taxes, as interest on debt is a tax-deductible
expense. The interest tax shield reduces the overall cost of capital, though it also
increases the financial risk of the firm. In designing the financing policy, that is, the
proportion of debt and equity in the capital structure, the firm aims at maximising the
firm value by minimizing the overall cost of capital.
The cost of capital can also be useful in deciding about the methods of financing
at a point of time. For example, cost may be compared in choosing between leasing and
borrowing. Of course, equally important considerations are control and risk.28
Performance appraisal
The cost of capital framework can be used to evaluate the financial performance of top
management.29 Such an evaluation will involve a comparison of actual profitability of the
investment projects undertaken by the firm with the projected overall cost of capital, and
the appraisal of the actual costs incurred by management in raising the required funds.
The cost of capital also plays a useful role in dividend decision and investment in
current assets.
2.1.2 Calculation of Cost of Debt
A company may raise debt in a variety of ways. It may borrow funds from financial
institutions or public either in the form of public deposits or debentures (bonds) for a
specified period of time at a certain rate of interest. A debenture or bond may be Issued